---
layout: post
title: "Usability is King"
date: 2016-12-03
---

It's interesting to talk with people who are a bit younger than me as they
follow their path in software development. Watching them develop similar skills
and habits, and face similar issues to myself is an interesting reflection on my
own experiences learning about software development. As the people around me go
through challenges and find solutions, they learn a lot of the same lessons that
I've learned over the years. I know that saying this at my age might sound
completely ridiculous, but maybe the interesting thing is that I can already say
something like that at my age. One of the things I reflect on sometimes is how I
feel that my knowledge in computer science grows so much each year. The me from
just a year ago knew so much less than I do now about so many things. This kind
of learning is the similar to what a lot of my peers go through. Being around
other people going through similar things that I went through before is a good
way to identify the specific ways in which my own understanding has grown over
time.

One of the most interesting transitions that I went through, and that I feel a
lot of people go through is when they start to care about usability. There's
this appearance, at least to me, that young techies have an attraction to deeply
customized, "cool" looking interfaces. I know that I was all about wobbly,
transparent windows, desktop cubes, and super customized colors when I was a bit
younger. Making everything look and work exactly how I want it to is something
that I find very enticing in other ways, and it's something that I still haven't
completely gotten rid of. I hope that I don't, either, because there's a kind of
satisfaction to building software in exactly the way that I want that brings me
a certain kind of joy. Although building software systems just the way that I
want them is something that I still enjoy very much, the other ways that I used
to like having everything exactly the way I want it have been diminished.

I see this sort of pattern in the other people I'm around too: over time, they
shift away from the hyper-customized interfaces into ones that are more
familiar. For me, at least, the biggest consideration now is general usability.
Instead of caring about having exactly the right icon theme to complement my
shell, I'm content with simply having everything stock, so long as it works
well.

One article I read a while back about this (TODO: maybe find this article and
link to it) made a point about how Apple was (or at least, used to be) great
because it was a company with Opinions. These capital-O Opinions, over
lower-case o opinions, mean that Apple had certain ideas about they wanted you
to use their products, and they got upset if you ventured too far outside that.
In return, they made sure that everything worked very well within that set of
Opinions. The end-result of this was that everything "just worked," because
everything was predicated on the same set of Opinions.

I think that a big part of consumer technology, versus enterprise or developer
technology, is that of Opinions over opinions. More niche use cases, like
enterprise deployments, might have their own set of Opinions, and whatever
software they used need to be able to bend to their own needs. However, most
consumers don't have the knowledge, ability, or time to create these kinds of
Opinions. Instead, the products developed for them are created with those
Opinions in mind. These Opinions have behind them thinking and refinement from
thousands of expert hours, in every way. What this means is that all they have
to do is adapt to have those same Opinions, and they too can benefit from all
that work.

Narratives and frameworks form a very important basis of how people view the
world. Many studies corroborate the fact that users--and people, in
general--tend to rely on previous knowledge to guide their learning in a new
area. This means that being exposed to a certain set of Opinions as a consumer
leads people to then examine and consider other products that they come across
in terms of that framework, and those sets of assumptions. I imagine this is the
basis for all the fanboy-ing that I see online, and the basis for all the
arguments along various technological lines by people who really don't have a
good basis of knowledge in those subject matters.

Most striking for me has been the very material change in the way that I think
about Microsoft and its products. I have recently been picking up Windows
Internals, which dives into deep details of the design of Windows at a system
level. One of the memes that I've heard many times about Windows is that it's a
badly designed, poorly implemented system. I regret to say that I've come to be
of the opposite opinion, because a lot of the things that Microsoft has done are
extremely interesting. I remember once reading that the reason that Windows did
so well was mainly a case of "right place, right time," over any real technical
differences. One of the lessons that I feel like I've learned over time is that
business decisions--and generally, most decisions--often have a basis in both.
Something has to not only be the best technical decision, but also the best
political, or the most profitable, before it really becomes the best decision
overall.

This kind of thinking is something that I always feel is lacking in the tech
community. One conversation that I've had pretty recently was about how
engineers routinely get paid a whole lot less than managers. This sentiment is
one that I feel like I've heard many times before, and it's usually predicated
on some sort of "managers don't really know anything" kind of thinking. If you
talk to really any startup that's had much success, a lot of them will tell you
about how they started out being organizationally flat, but then went away from
that model. What I imagine they've found--which is something that I think I've
found--is that a good manager is crucial to having a good team. Good managers
make sure that the problems happening outside the team don't creep in to
distract and undermine the team's efforts in general. The worst managers are
probably those that don't do a good job of that. These managers leave their
teams in disarray, constantly feeling the pull from external sources in too many
ways.

Dealing with people is something that is really very difficult. I think a lot of
the people who are of the "managers don't know anything" club would probably
agree on that front, which is why I always find it interesting when they try to
make that argument. I completely understand their frustration if they have a bad
manager, or if they have a good manager who keeps them from doing something they
think is a good idea but would really only be self-destructive. I guess all I'm
saying is that I'm surprised that some people lack the emotional capacity to
separate their own personal opinions of someone and their opinions of a
profession in general.

The manager discussion hits on a lot of the same points that I feel like other
discussion of consumer software, and Apple, and so many other things do. The
main point is: usability is king. It doesn't matter what the specific technical
merits of some solution are, all that matters is that it results in the thing
that's most usable. For managers, the best solution is the one that's the most
usable from the point of view of the team. From the point of view of business
decisions, the best area to place focus is the one that results in the most
usable gains in whatever area. (maybe rephrase or rethink this point a little
bit). For software, the best choices are the ones that result in the most usable
piece of software by the most users.

Usability is king for the simple reason that humans make tools to amplify their
own abilities. Humans look for ways to make their lives easier, and especially
for the tools that can act as leverage for their own abilities. Find a big
stick, and you can focus less on strength and more on exactly how you want to
move something. The same can be said for software tools. The best software is
the one that takes something that's boring, or annoying, or error-prone, and
instead lets you focus on what's more important. A good calendar application
makes you focus less on making sure you keep events tidy, and more on just
creating and managing them. A good text editor lets you focus less on
formatting, and more on just writing the text.

These kinds of usability considerations underly many of the reasons why people
pick software, people, places, or really any number of other things.
