---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

I'm Jerome Rasky, a software engineer from California currently pursuing a
Bachelors of Computer Science at the University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, Canada.

Through my work as an intern in a number of positions, as well as my general
experience in a wide-ranging set of skills in computer science, I'm confident I
can take on almost any challenge.

Interesting challenges are really what I strive for, especially in my personal
projects. When I started my operating system kernel as a side-project, I had no
idea how operating systems came together, or how to communicate with hardware.
Undeterred, I jumped in, and through way too many long nights and lots of very
close reading, I slowly pulled back the curtain on a part of computer science
that had always mystified me.

Beyond just computer science, I'm always searching for the next challenge to
take on. I'm the former Vice President External of the UBC Computer Science
Student Society, and current VP Social. Last year as VP External I was charged
with the annual UBC Technical Career Fair, an event that spans five different
organizations. This year, I'm the organizer for all the social events the CS
club puts on. That means effectively managing people and resources to put
together great experiences.

When my friends see me reading the C++ standard, they tell me that I have a
warped idea of "fun." I disagree: I think everybody likes satisfying their
curiosity. I also think balance is very important in life, which is why I value
my own and others' time a lot. I always want to work as hard as I can, but
working hard means making time for friends and family so that you can recharge.

I'm very optimistic about the future. There's so much to be excited about, both
at the scale of the whole world, for things like advances in medicine, but also
at the personal level. Younger me never thought my life would be anything like
it is today. If you have something to add to this great adventure, do get in
touch!
